MilkDrop Preset File Format and Sections
A MilkDrop preset (the .milk file) is essentially a script that defines how the visualization behaves. It
contains several sections of equations that MilkDrop evaluates continuously to render graphics in sync with
audio. In MilkDrop 2 (and its successors), a preset is composed of four main types of scriptable sections:
per-frame equations, per-pixel equations, custom shapes, and custom waves . Each section plays a
distinct role:
Per-frame code: Runs once each frame (typically 30–60 times per second) and updates global
parameters like zoom level, rotation, motion speed, waveform color, etc. . This is where you use
time variables, audio FFT data, and math functions to make the scene evolve over time and react to
music.
Per-pixel code: Also known as per-vertex code, it runs across a grid of sample points on the screen
every frame (e.g. a 32×24 grid by default) rather than literally every pixel . It modifies how the
image is warped or transformed at different screen locations, based on spatial coordinates.
Custom shapes: Definitions for drawn geometric shapes (like polygons) that can appear on top of
the visualization. You can have several shapes per preset (4 in MilkDrop 1.x; up to 5 in MilkDrop 2;
and 16 in MilkDrop 3 ), each with its own properties and optional per-frame code for animation.
Custom waves: Definitions for additional waveform or spectrum visualizations. These are like
programmable oscilloscopes – they plot audio data (waveform or FFT) in custom ways. Each custom
wave can have a per-frame script and a per-point script to precisely control its appearance.
File Syntax: A .milk file is a plain text file. It isn’t formatted in a human-readable markup like JSON or
XML; instead, it contains key-value pairs and blocks of code. For example, you’ll find lines for static
parameters (e.g., wave_r=1.0 , wave_mode=5 , shape1_enabled=1 , etc.) and sections where code is
written as semicolon-separated expressions (similar to writing mini C/JavaScript expressions). In the
Winamp MilkDrop editor, the preset is divided into menus for Wave, Motion, Shapes, etc., but in the file these
all live together as text. Key sections include:
Preset constants: e.g. title, rating, and various default sliders (wave modes, colors, etc.).
Per-frame equation block: one or more lines of expressions that execute every frame.
Per-pixel (vertex) equation block: expressions that execute for each grid point (affecting spatial
warping).
Custom shape blocks: for each shape, a set of parameters (position, sides, colors, etc.) and an
optional per-frame script block.
Custom wave blocks: for each wave, parameters (number of samples, display style, etc.), plus
optional per-frame and per-point script blocks.
MilkDrop 2 and later added an option to include GPU shader code (HLSL) in the preset as well. If present,
shader code appears in special sections (labeled warp and comp in the file or editor). We’ll discuss
shaders further below.
1
•
2
•
3
•
4
•
•
•
•
•
•
1
Per-Frame Equations (Frame Logic)
The per-frame code drives the high-level animation and responds to the music on a frame-by-frame basis.
This code is executed once for each video frame. Within it, you can adjust global visualization parameters
and any custom variables. For example, you might modulate the zoom factor, rotation angle, waveform
opacity, or color components here. The code looks like a series of simple expressions, e.g.:
wave_r = wave_r + 0.5*sin(time*1.13);
wave_g = wave_g + 0.5*sin(time*1.23);
wave_b = wave_b + 0.5*sin(time*1.33);
zoom = 1 + 0.03*bass;
Each frame, MilkDrop evaluates these in order. You have access to a set of built-in variables and functions.
Important inputs include the special time variables and audio spectrum variables:
time : the current playback time in seconds (continuous) .
frame : the frame counter (increments each frame) .
fps : the current frame rate (frames per second) .
progress : how far we are into the current preset’s lifespan (0 to 1 from start to end of preset; if
presets aren’t on a timer this may just run 0→1 slowly or be static) .
And critically, audio-reactive variables: MilkDrop performs an FFT on the audio each frame, dividing it
(stereo) into frequency bands. It provides: bass , mid , treb for low, mid, and high frequency amplitude
levels (roughly normalized so ~1.0 is average level) and bass_att , mid_att , treb_att which are
attenuated (smoothed) versions that don’t jump as sharply . A value >1.0 indicates above-average energy
in that band (e.g. a bass drop might push bass to 2 or more), while values around 0.5 or 0.7 would be
relatively quiet. These are the primary hooks for making visuals react to music. For instance, a common
technique is to tie the zoom or rotation to the bass level (zoom out on kick drum hits) or to change colors
when treble is high, etc.
The per-frame code can use standard arithmetic, logical, and trigonometric functions. MilkDrop’s scripting
language is simple but fairly powerful – it’s derived from Nullsoft’s EEL (the same expression evaluator from
Winamp’s AVS plugin) . You have the usual operators ( + - * / for arithmetic, = for assignment,
and even bitwise ops) and many math functions: sin(), cos(), tan(), asin(), acos(), atan() ,
exponentiation ( pow , sqrt ), logs, abs , as well as some handy ones like
min, max, sign, if(cond, trueVal, falseVal) and boolean helpers above(a,b) /
below(a,b) to return 1 or 0 based on a comparison . Randomness is available via rand(N)
which gives a random integer 0 to N-1 . There is no explicit looping construct (no for or while ), but
since the code runs every frame, you often achieve iterative effects by using frame counters or oscillatory
functions.
What can you do in per-frame? A lot: You can continuously rotate the image ( rot variable), zoom in/out
( zoom ), shift it ( dx , dy for drift), adjust distortion ( warp amount), or alter the drawn waveform’s
attributes ( wave_r , wave_g , wave_b , wave_a for waveform color and alpha, etc.). You can also define
your own temporary variables on the fly. If you write myVar = sin(time); then myVar exists for this
• 5
• 6
• 7
•
8
9
10 11
12 13
14
2
frame (and beyond, if you declared it in the init section – more on variable persistence later). Per-frame is
also where you’d implement conditional logic, e.g. flash the screen white on a beat:
alb = if(bass_att > 2.5, 1, alb*0.9); (MilkDrop has an alphablend or brightness factor
alb for the whole screen – this is just an illustrative example). In short, per-frame code handles temporal
effects (how things change over time globally and in response to music) .
Because it executes so often, per-frame code needs to be efficient (and it generally is just a few lines of
algebra). This code sets up values that the subsequent stages (per-pixel and shapes/waves) will use for finer
detail.
Per-Pixel (Per-Vertex) Equations (Spatial Warping)
The per-pixel equations (MilkDrop 1.x called them per-vertex) run after the per-frame code each frame.
Despite the name, they are not executed for every single pixel on your screen (that would be too slow in
software). Instead, MilkDrop divides the screen into a grid (by default 32×24 = 768 points) and runs the per-
pixel script at each grid point . It then interpolates the results to apply to all pixels in between.
Essentially, it creates a low-poly mesh and warps it according to your equations, which gives a smooth
continuous warp across the full image. The grid density can be adjusted by the user; a higher mesh (say
64×48 or more) yields more accurate but slower per-pixel effects, whereas a low mesh (e.g. 16×12) is faster
but can show artifacts. This is a classic performance trade-off, and MilkDrop even allowed dynamic mesh-
size adjustments for speed.
Purpose of per-pixel code: It lets you vary certain transformation parameters across the spatial dimensions
of the screen, instead of applying one value globally. For example, maybe you want the edges of the screen
to twist more than the center, or create a fisheye lens effect, or have the background zoom in a spiral
pattern. Per-frame code alone can’t do that because it sets one value for the whole frame. Per-pixel code, by
contrast, can say “at this x,y coordinate, modify the zoom by this amount, but over here, modify it by a
different amount.”
MilkDrop provides special read-only variables in per-pixel context that tell you the position: x and y
(normalized screen coordinates, 0 to 1) of the point being processed, rad (the radial distance of this point
from the center of the screen), and ang (the angle of the point in polar coordinates) . Using these,
you can craft spatial effects. A classic example: perspective warp. Normally if you zoom an image, it’s uniform
and gives no 3D depth feeling. But if you reduce zoom in the center and increase it toward edges, the result
looks like a 3D bulge. You can do this with one line in per-pixel: zoom = zoom + rad*0.1; which adds
10% extra zoom at the edges ( rad is 0 at center, ~1 at corners) . MilkDrop’s authoring guide illustrates
this exact snippet and its effect .
What can you control per-pixel? The key writable variables here include most of the transformation
parameters: zoom , zoomexp (zoom exponent for curvature), rot (rotation), warp (the warping
strength for the feedback effect), cx / cy (the center of zoom/rotation), dx / dy (translational
movement), sx / sy (stretch/skew on X and Y) . By default, these were all set by the per-frame
stage as single values; in per-pixel, you are essentially adding offsets or altering them based on position.
You do not directly set color here (colors are handled by waves and shapes or global tint; per-pixel is mainly
geometry).
15
3
16 17
18
18
19 20
3
One thing to note: per-pixel code runs on the previous frame’s image in MilkDrop’s pipeline. MilkDrop’s
visuals use feedback: each frame, the last frame’s image is warped and then new waveforms/shapes are
drawn on top. The per-pixel equations control that warping of the last frame (this is called the “motion” or
“warp” stage). So, if per-frame set rot = 0.1 , that means “rotate the whole image 0.1 radians this frame.”
If per-pixel then does something like rot = rot + 0.1*rad , now at the center rot is 0.1 but at edges
rot might be 0.1 + 0.1*1 = 0.2 radians. The outer parts twist twice as much as center, causing a spiral
streaking effect. Because of the feedback nature, these warps accumulate frame to frame, often producing
intricate patterns.
Interpolation and quality: As mentioned, MilkDrop interpolates between the grid points after computing
per-pixel code. This means your per-pixel formulas are effectively smooth across the screen, and you rarely
see the grid unless using a very low mesh size or extremely high-frequency changes. The default 32×24 grid
was chosen as a good quality-performance balance . If you push mesh higher (in config, up to 192×144
max), the per-pixel code executes many more times per frame (impacting CPU) but can capture finer detail.
Modern systems handle quite high mesh sizes easily, and ProjectM even allows adjusting this if needed.
Access to audio in per-pixel: Interestingly, you can use the audio variables ( bass , etc.) inside per-pixel
code as well, but note that those are constant across the screen (they don’t vary with x or y ). So if you
reference bass in per-pixel, you’ll get the same value at every vertex – meaning effectively you’d be
applying some bass-dependent offset uniformly. In practice, that’s usually done in per-frame instead (for
efficiency, you wouldn’t need to recompute it at every grid point). However, you might use audio in a
conditional way in per-pixel, e.g., only warp outer pixels if bass is above a threshold (making the screen
shake on bass hits at the edges). This is a niche use; generally per-pixel focuses on spatial coordinates.
One must also be careful with custom variables: any variable you create inside per-pixel code (that isn’t a
built-in like x,y,rad ) is essentially local to each vertex calculation. It won’t automatically carry over from
one point to the next, or to the next frame, unless you explicitly use the bridging mechanism we’ll talk about
(the q variables). In essence, per-pixel code should be written as a pure function of position and the
current frame’s context. It’s like a vertex shader in modern GPU terms – no persistent state per vertex from
last frame (unless you coded something into a global).
Waveforms and Custom Waves
MilkDrop always had the concept of drawing the audio waveform (or spectrum) over the visuals. In classic
MilkDrop (1.x), the user could choose a waveform mode (e.g., a single oscilloscope line, double mirrored
waves, a filled oscilloscope, a dotted line, etc.) using the preset settings . There are 8 built-in
waveform styles selectable via wave_mode 0 – 7 . Along with that, there are parameters to control the
wave’s color ( wave_r, wave_g, wave_b ), transparency ( wave_a ), position ( wave_x, wave_y shift),
and style toggles like wave_thick (draw a thicker line) , wave_additive (use add blend so bright
parts intensify colors) , wave_brighten (auto-brighten the wave) , and wave_dots (draw as
points instead of continuous line) . There’s even the mysterious wave_mystery parameter whose exact
function wasn’t officially documented (hence the name) – it’s a quirky parameter that affects the shape
of certain waveforms in non-obvious ways.
These built-in waveforms are drawn by MilkDrop automatically each frame, and you can animate them by
changing the above parameters via per-frame code. For example, you could oscillate wave_r/wave_g/
3
21 22
21
23
24 24
25
26
4
wave_b to cycle the wave’s color , or increase wave_y to move the waveform vertically. Many presets
use the built-in waveform (it’s the wiggly line often seen in the center). However, the built-in options, while
useful, are limited to a few shapes (line, doubled line, circle, etc.) and behaviors.
Custom waves extend this by giving the preset author full control of how to draw the wave or spectrum. As
of MilkDrop 1.04, custom waves became available, up to 4 in a preset (MilkDrop 2.x also defaulted to 4;
MilkDrop 3 increases to 16) . A custom wave lets you essentially plot the audio data in any shape or
pattern you want, using scripting.
Each custom wave has its own set of parameters and code sections:
Wave attributes (static): In the preset file you’ll have fields like waveN_enabled (turn it on/off),
waveN_samples (how many sample points, up to 512) , waveN_sep (maybe a stereo
separation flag), waveN_bSpectrum (whether to use frequency spectrum instead of waveform
amplitude), and base color fields ( waveN_r,g,b,a ). Not all are directly documented in the snippet
above, but basically the MilkDrop menu allowed you to set these for each custom wave. For instance,
you could choose to sample 512 points of the spectrum (instead of waveform) and draw them.
Per-frame code (custom wave): Much like the main per-frame, each custom wave can have a small
code block that runs once per frame . In it, you typically adjust the wave’s color or other
properties over time. For example, you might make the wave’s opacity pulse with the music, or
change the number of samples dynamically ( samples is writable in code , so you could use
fewer points when music is quiet, etc.). The variables accessible here include time, frame, the audio
variables ( bass etc.) , and also a special set of Q and T variables (discussed later) that carry
info from the main script. The wave’s per-frame code cannot directly set its points – that’s the job of
the per-point code – but it can set overall settings and prepare values.
Per-point (per-vertex) code: This is the powerful part. For each of the N sample points in the wave,
MilkDrop runs the per-point code to determine where that point is drawn and what color it has
. By default, if you don’t provide per-point code, MilkDrop would draw the samples as a standard
wave (left to right, center vertical position, connecting points). But with code, you can plot them
arbitrarily. The per-point code has its own variables:
sample (a 0..1 value indicating the position along the list of samples, i.e. 0 for first point, 1 for last)
.
value1 and value2 which are the audio data at that point – if using waveform, these are left/
right channel amplitude at that sample; if using spectrum, they are magnitudes for that frequency
band .
You can set x and y (0..1 screen coordinates) for each point to plot it wherever you want . For
instance, you could map x = 0.5 + 0.4*sin(sample*6.28) and y = 0.5 +
0.4*cos(sample*6.28) to make the waveform draw in a circle instead of a line. Or create a spiral,
or a vertical bar – anything you can express mathematically.
You can also set the color per point: r, g, b, a (these default to the base color from the per-
frame section, but you can override per point) . So you could make the waveform gradient or
flash certain parts.
In essence, custom wave per-point code is like writing a little program to draw a polyline or point-cloud,
where the “data” you’re plotting is the music. It’s extremely powerful – many flashy presets draw complex
patterns (swirls, circles, expanding rings) that are actually just the audio waveform drawn in a fancy path.
27
4
•
28
•
29 30
28
31 32
•
33
34
•
35
•
36
• 34
•
37
5
Because custom waves are so flexible, they effectively supersede the built-in waveform in advanced presets.
MilkDrop 1.x only had built-ins, but from 1.04 onward authors often disabled the regular wave
( wave_mode=0 meaning off) and used a custom wave for cooler effects. For example, drawing spectrum
bars in a circle: you can take the 64 FFT bands and place them as radial lines around a circle by computing
coordinates from the sample index – something impossible to do with the old modes.
One important note: custom waves can choose to use the waveform or spectrum. Typically a toggle (in the
MilkDrop editor UI it’s “Spectrum” on/off for custom wave). If spectrum mode is on, then MilkDrop will feed
frequency data into value1/2 instead of time-domain wave samples. So you might then use sample
(0..1) to correspond to frequency from low to high and value1 as the magnitude. Many presets do this to
draw an equalizer-like shape.
Custom Shapes
Custom shapes were another big addition in MilkDrop 1.04+. They let preset authors draw geometric
shapes (triangles, circles, stars, etc.) on screen that can move and change each frame. Prior to that,
MilkDrop had no easy way to render arbitrary polygons or images; you were limited to the waveform and
the smearing of the previous frame. Custom shapes opened up a huge range of visual possibilities (from
simple pulsing circles to complex tiling patterns and even sprite-like use cases).
Basics: A custom shape is essentially a polygon defined by a number of sides (between 3 and 100 in classic
MilkDrop) . If you set sides = 100, it’s basically a circle; if sides = 5, a pentagon; 3 is a triangle; etc. You
can control the shape’s position ( x , y on screen, where (0.5,0.5) is center), its size ( rad = radius), and its
rotation angle ( ang ) . You also specify colors: MilkDrop uses a two-color gradient for filling the
shape – you set inner color ( r,g,b,a ) and outer color ( r2,g2,b2,a2 ) , and it will color the shape
smoothly from center (color1) to edge (color2). Additionally, there’s a border (outline) color
border_r,g,b,a if you want an outline drawn . You can toggle whether the shape is additive
( additive=1 means it adds its color onto the background like light; 0 means it alpha blends normally)
. And you can choose a thick outline option which overdraws the border a few times to make it
brighter/bolder .
A very special option is textured : if textured=1 , then the shape is not a solid color – instead, it is filled
with the previous frame’s image, mapped onto it . This effectively lets you create feedback mirrors and
tunnels. For example, the “Geiss – Feedback (feedback tunnel)” preset uses a textured shape that takes the
last frame and maps it onto a rotating square, creating a hall-of-mirrors effect . When textured=1 ,
the tex_zoom and tex_ang parameters control how that texture is scaled and rotated inside the shape
. So you could take the last frame, rotate it 45 degrees and shrink it inside the polygon, etc.,
achieving recursive visuals.
Like waves, each custom shape in the preset can have a per-frame code block to animate its properties
. In that code, the shape-specific variables (x, y, rad, ang, r, g, b, etc. for that shape) are all available and
writable. For instance, you might do ang = ang + 0.1; so the shape spins continuously, or
rad = 0.2 + 0.1*sin(time*3); to pulse the radius. The shape’s code also sees the audio and time
variables, so you can make it react (e.g. change size with bass). Essentially, the shape per-frame equations
work just like the main per-frame, but only affect that shape’s parameters . MilkDrop will execute the
shape’s per-frame code once each frame (per shape), then draw the shape.
38 39
40 41
42 43
44
45
46
47 45
48
49
50 51
52
53
6
A powerful feature is instancing of shapes: Each shape entry can be drawn multiple times per frame as a
series of instances. There are two special variables for this: num_inst (how many instances total) and
instance (the index of the current instance, from 0 to num_inst-1) . MilkDrop will loop through
the shape’s per-frame code num_inst times, each time setting the instance number. Your code can
use instance to, say, offset the position or angle for each copy. This means one shape definition can
actually produce dozens or even hundreds of graphical elements on screen. For example, you could set
num_inst=100 and then in code do ang = instance * 0.0628; x = 0.5 +
0.3*cos(instance*0.0628); y = 0.5 + 0.3*sin(instance*0.0628); to place 100 small shapes in
a circle pattern. Each loop could also use time or audio, e.g. color each instance differently or scale it based
on bass . Up to 1024 instances are allowed for one shape (though that many might be slow). This
instancing effectively provides a loop inside the preset – one of the only ways to get a loop-like behavior
since the expression language itself has no loops. MilkDrop 1.x/2 allowed 4 shape definitions, each with up
to 1024 instances, which is plenty. (MilkDrop 3 expands to 16 shapes, still up to 1024 inst each, and even
raises max sides to 500 for very complex polygons .)
To summarize, custom shapes are like independent overlay graphics you script. They can be as simple as a
static border or as complex as dozens of moving pieces that react to the music. Custom waves and shapes
greatly enhance the visual variety: MilkDrop’s built-in warping + waveform is already dynamic, but adding
scripted shapes and waves means you can display text-like patterns, flashing geometric grids, rotating 3D-
like objects, etc., all integrated with the beat of the music.
Frame-by-Frame Execution and Variable Scoping
With all these pieces (per-frame, per-pixel, shape, wave, etc.), it’s important to understand when each runs
and how they interact each frame. The execution model of MilkDrop is deterministic and runs in a fixed
sequence every frame:
Preset Init (once on load): When a preset is loaded, there is an optional “init” code section that
runs. Here you might initialize variables that you want to persist for the life of the preset (e.g., set up
random offsets, or starting values for counters). This is not always explicitly present in presets (if
omitted, it’s just empty), but it’s where you’d put one-time setup. Variables set here will carry into the
first frame’s computations.
Per-frame equations (preset): At the start of each frame, MilkDrop evaluates the preset’s per-frame
code . This updates global variables for this frame based on last frame’s state and current inputs
(time/audio). For example, you compute new zoom , rot , wave_r here.
Per-pixel (vertex) equations (preset): Immediately after per-frame, MilkDrop takes the values from
per-frame and runs the per-pixel code across the mesh . At each vertex, it may modify zoom ,
rot , etc. according to position. These adjustments apply to the warp of the previous frame’s texture.
When this is done, MilkDrop uses those transformed coordinates to sample the last frame’s image
and draw the warped background for the current frame . In MilkDrop 2, if a warp shader is
present, it executes instead of the CPU per-pixel script (more on that soon). Conceptually, both do the
same job: warping the old frame into the new frame’s background.
Custom shapes (per-frame and draw): Next, for each custom shape that is enabled, MilkDrop runs
that shape’s per-frame code. If num_inst for that shape is greater than 1, it will loop through the
code that many times, updating the shape’s variables each iteration with instance number
. Each iteration is then immediately drawn as a separate shape instance on the screen. So
39 54
55 56
57
1.
2.
2
3.
58
59
4.
55
54
7
essentially, shape drawing happens during this step. MilkDrop goes shape1, runs its code (loop),
draws all instances of shape1; then shape2, etc. The shapes are drawn on top of the already-warped
background. They are typically drawn with blending (alpha or add) onto the scene.
Custom waves (per-frame and per-point): After shapes, for each custom wave that’s enabled,
MilkDrop runs the wave’s per-frame code . Then it retrieves the current audio data (waveform or
spectrum) for the number of samples specified. It then runs the wave’s per-point code for each
sample , plotting the points (or lines between them) as specified. This renders the custom waves
on top of everything (they often appear as bright lines or patterns). If there is no per-point code,
MilkDrop just draws the points in a default manner (e.g. connected line).
Built-in waveform and final composite: If the preset still has the built-in waveform enabled
( wave_mode not 0), it will draw that now using the current wave_r,g,b,a,etc. parameters
. This always draws on top of shapes (unless those were additive with full brightness). In practice,
many modern presets either use custom waves or set the built-in wave to a subtle mode. But if used,
it’s drawn here.
Post-processing shaders (MilkDrop 2+): In MilkDrop 2/3, there is also a composite shader stage
after all drawing . If the preset includes a composite pixel shader, it runs now, operating on the
whole final frame image before it’s presented. Composite shaders can do things like full-screen color
effects, blur, fish-eye lens, etc., beyond what the basic pipeline does. If no comp shader is present,
the image goes out as-is.
Display / feedback loop: The frame is displayed. Then, internally, MilkDrop takes this frame and
treats it as the “previous frame” for the next iteration. So the next cycle, the image we just drew will
be the one that gets warped by per-pixel or shaders.
This sequence happens typically 60 times a second (or whatever frame rate). Meanwhile, audio data is
streaming in and FFT is giving new bass/mid/treb values each frame.
Variable scoping and persistence: Because there are multiple “contexts” (preset frame vs. per-pixel vs.
shape vs. wave), MilkDrop organizes variables into what the authoring guide calls variable pools . The
rules can be a bit confusing, but in summary:
Variables declared at the preset level (either in init or in per-frame code) persist from frame to
frame . For example, if in per-frame you do mycount = mycount + 1; and you initialized
mycount in init to 0, then mycount will increment each frame – it remembers its value. All preset-
level standard variables (like zoom , rot , etc., and your custom ones) carry over frame to frame
unless you deliberately reset them. This means you can have accumulating effects or state machines.
Variables in per-pixel code do not persist in the same way. Each time the per-pixel equations run, it’s
as if starting fresh for that vertex. Also, you cannot see normal preset variables directly in per-pixel
scope (the per-pixel code is executed in a separate context for each vertex). For example, if you set
foo=5; in per-frame, and then try to use foo in per-pixel, it won’t automatically have 5. The
preset authoring guide explicitly warns that user-defined vars don’t carry from per-frame to per-
vertex – you’ll “not get the correct value” . The solution is to use the special bridging variables Q1–
Q32 (coming next).
Variables in shape per-frame code and wave per-frame code also do not see the preset’s normal
variables unless bridged. Each shape or wave has its own context. However, shapes/waves can read
the global audio and time directly (those are global read-only) , and they can use their own
persistent variables if needed (a variable you declare in a shape’s per-frame will persist to that
shape’s next frame, similar to preset-level persistence).
5.
29
33
6.
21
26
7.
60
8.
61
•
62 63
•
64
•
31
8
Variables in wave per-point code are ephemeral to each point. Generally, you treat per-point a bit
functionally – it computes output for a point without memory of the last point (except if you explicitly
carry something via Q or T arrays between points, e.g. to do smoothing as the guide suggests) .
To share data between these stages, MilkDrop provides Q-vars and T-vars as pipelines:
Q1–Q32: Think of the Q variables as a 32-slot array of floats that each stage passes along . The life
cycle is:
You can set Q-vars in the preset init code (e.g., set q1=0 initially, etc.). Those initial values will then
be available in subsequent frames.
At the start of each frame, MilkDrop resets q1..q32 to whatever they were left as at the end of the
previous frame’s preset per-frame code . Then it runs the preset per-frame code, which can
modify q’s further. (In practice, this means you can use q’s as a carry-over between frames if you
update them every frame, because if you don’t change a particular q, it will keep the last value from
previous frame’s end.)
Right after preset per-frame, when MilkDrop enters per-pixel, it makes sure the q values are those
from end of per-frame. The per-pixel code can read q1–q32 (they are available to use), but per-pixel
code typically shouldn’t modify q’s (if it does, it only affects that vertex’s copy – not globally).
More importantly, when MilkDrop calls shape per-frame and wave per-frame code, it copies in the
q1–q32 values from the end of preset per-frame as well . So the first line in a shape’s per-frame
sees q’s equal to whatever the main per-frame left them as. This is how information “flows downhill”
into shapes and waves. For example, if your preset per-frame computed a complex pattern and
stored some results in q1–q4, your shape code can now use those q1–q4 values.
Inside shape/wave per-frame, you can also modify q variables if needed. However, these changes
won’t go back and affect the preset or other shapes during that frame. They only matter in one
specific case: wave per-point code. When a custom wave’s per-frame code finishes, whatever q’s it
set are then used as the starting q values for that wave’s per-point iterations . Furthermore,
within the per-point loop, if you update a q (say you accumulate something across points), the
updated q persists to the next point in that same frame . This allows techniques like smoothing:
you could set q1 = 0.8*q1 + 0.2*value1; for each point to low-pass filter the waveform. At the
end of the wave’s points, those q changes are thrown away (they don’t persist to next frame unless
you also stash them somewhere like a T or re-output to itself in wave per-frame every time).
Q’s do not persist frame-to-frame automatically; they reset each frame to the preset per-frame
output as described . If you want something persistent, you either use a normal custom variable
or you continually feed a value into q from a persistent variable. Essentially, q’s are for bridging
between different code contexts in the same frame .
T1–T8: These are similar but local to shapes and waves . T-vars exist because sometimes you need to
bridge between init and per-frame inside a shape/wave, or between wave per-frame and wave per-point,
without interfering with the preset’s Q’s. The flow is simpler: for a given custom shape or wave, T1–T8 can
carry values from that shape’s init code to its per-frame, and from shape per-frame to each instance
iteration (for waves: wave init → wave per-frame → wave per-point) . They basically solve similar scope
gaps but are isolated for each shape/wave. Many preset authors might not need T’s, but they are there for
more complex state passing.
•
65
66 67
•
•
68 69
•
•
68
•
70
70
•
69
68 71
72
73
9
Persistence of custom variables: The general rule is custom variables persist within the context they’re
declared in, but not across context switches. So:
If you declare a variable in preset per-frame (or init), it stays around next frame in preset per-frame
(so long as the preset stays loaded) . For example, float beatCounter; in init and then
using it in per-frame to count beats – it will remember its value.
If you declare a var in per-pixel, each frame it starts fresh (and even each vertex calculation it starts
at default). The MilkDrop guide suggests treating per-vertex user vars as scratch only .
In shape per-frame, a static var would persist next frame for that shape. But shape per-frame is
called after preset per-frame each time; if you need something from preset scope, you’d use Q or
just refer to a global variable (since preset variables are in scope inside shape code, but their values
might be stale if not updated to Q – actually to clarify: preset’s global variables like zoom might not
mean much inside shape code because the shape doesn’t use zoom . However, you could technically
read a preset variable in shape code if it’s not overridden. Usually one uses q’s for clarity).
If you declare a var inside the shape’s per-frame code itself, it will persist next frame (similar to how
preset per-frame works) because that shape’s code is run anew each frame and the variable retains
its last value.
Wave per-point variables reset each frame (unless carried by T or Q as mentioned).
This system is admittedly complex, but the MilkDrop authoring guide provides diagrams and explains: the
Q’s and T’s are the intended method to transfer values between the different execution pools . As a
preset author, you often do something like: compute an expensive or global calculation in preset per-frame,
store it in, say, q1 ; then use q1 inside your per-pixel or shape code many times (saves recomputation
and ensures consistency).
Frame-by-frame flow with an example: Suppose you want to make a shape that always sits at the point of
highest bass response on the screen (just a contrived example). You could in per-frame compute the “bass
angle”: q1 = ang + bass*1.57; (say, whatever logic to get an angle from bass). Then in your shape’s
per-frame, you set ang = q1; so the shape’s rotation comes from that. The sequence would be: each
frame preset sets q1; then shape reads q1. If you didn’t use q1 and tried to use some normal variable, it
might not update at the right time or be out of sync.
The bottom line: MilkDrop’s execution is a pipeline – preset frame code → pixel warp → shape code →
wave code – and the state flows through global variables and these special arrays. This was all designed to
maximize flexibility while keeping performance reasonable (by avoiding truly global variables that update at
per-pixel frequency, for instance).
Shader Integration (MilkDrop 2 & 3)
MilkDrop 1.x did all its rendering with these CPU-calculated equations (plus some fixed-function DirectX
tricks). In MilkDrop 2.0 (2007), Ryan Geiss introduced GPU pixel shaders to the mix . This was a big shift
because it allowed much more complex pixel-by-pixel computations to be done on the graphics card,
enabling effects that would be too slow in the old system, and opening the door to new visual styles.
•
62 63
•
74
•
•
•
75 72
76
10
In MilkDrop 2 (and continuing in MilkDrop 3 and ProjectM), each preset can include up to two shader
programs (written in HLSL, shader model 3 targets originally):
The Warp shader: This runs in place of the per-pixel equations (if present). It is a pixel (fragment)
shader that takes the previous frame’s texture as input and outputs a warped version for the current
background . In the shader code, you don’t manually loop over pixels; the GPU does that. The
shader has access to a few inputs like the current UV coordinates, time, and some of the same
variables that the CPU code would have had. The MilkDrop authoring guide indicates that in the
warp shader, you get variables like uv (the coordinate you should sample from the previous frame),
and you can manipulate it . Essentially, the warp shader can do arbitrary distortion: you could
implement a fish-eye lens, complex swirling, zoom oscillations, etc., with math or even texture
lookups that would be hard to approximate with 32×24 grid. If no warp shader is present, MilkDrop
falls back to using the per-pixel equations on the CPU as we described earlier.
The Composite shader: This runs after the warp (and after shapes & waves), on the final composed
image, right before displaying . It can be used to apply full-screen effects. For example, you could
write a composite shader to simulate an old TV (distorting colors via a filter), or do additional blur,
bloom, mirror effects, etc. The composite shader can sample the “Main” texture (the result of the
warp + drawing) and produce a final color. If no comp shader is given, MilkDrop by default just draws
the shapes and waves as normal.
The preset file will have sections for these shaders if used, usually as large blocks of HLSL code. Not all
presets use them; many presets remained purely equation-based. But some of the most advanced (and
GPU-intensive) visuals come from shader presets.
From a compatibility standpoint, these shaders introduced a challenge for open-source reimplementations
like ProjectM, because MilkDrop’s shaders are written in DirectX/HLSL. ProjectM initially used NVIDIA’s Cg
toolkit to translate and run these on OpenGL, but Cg is long deprecated . Newer ProjectM versions have
built their own HLSL->GLSL translator and support a lot of MilkDrop shader syntax now (with some
limitations on very advanced or DirectX-specific shader functions) . This means most presets with
shaders will work in ProjectM 4.x by automatically converting the shader code to GLSL behind the scenes.
MilkDrop 3 (which is essentially a fork/enhancement of MilkDrop 2) still uses HLSL on Windows; it remains
backward-compatible so it retains the same shader system .
It’s worth noting that MilkDrop’s shaders are pixel shaders only; there is no user-defined vertex shader in
presets. The vertex processing (for the mesh, shapes, etc.) is fixed. The pixel shaders were mainly
introduced to offload the per-pixel calculation to GPU and to allow new effects that weren’t possible with
the old fixed pipeline (like multi-pass blur or advanced color effects). In the MilkDrop authoring guide’s
shader reference, they describe available shader constants and some intrinsic functions (like sampling
special textures: MilkDrop provides some built-in noise textures and blur textures for use in shaders to do
feedback effects) . Shaders can also get inputs like the q variables (MilkDrop passes some of the Q
array and other uniforms into the shader so the CPU-side calculations can influence the GPU code). This
way, you can still use the familiar MilkDrop variables inside the shader, but you might write more complex
math in HLSL than the expression language allows.
Example of shader use: A preset might use the warp shader to create a feedback fractal zoom. The HLSL
warp code could take the current pixel’s UV, adjust it like uv = (uv - 0.5) * 0.9 + 0.5 +
float2(sin(time), cos(time))*0.1; ret = tex2D(sampler_main, uv); – which would zoom out
•
60 59
77 78
•
60
79
80 81
82
83 84
11
the image around the center and oscillate it with time, sampling the previous frame ( sampler_main is the
last frame’s texture) . Doing that on GPU is smooth; on CPU you might not even attempt such
continuous zoom each frame. Meanwhile, the composite shader could add a subtle color tint or mirror
effect. The possibilities are huge – essentially you could implement any fullscreen pixel transformation akin
to a simplified fragment shader from Shadertoy, but within the MilkDrop preset ecosystem.
MilkDrop 3 doesn’t change the shader language, but it did raise some limits (like more q variables, as
mentioned, and more shapes/waves which indirectly means more data for shaders if they use those). It also
added new simple waveforms and such, but the core shader concept is the same.
Tools and Resources for Preset Creation
Creating MilkDrop presets involves both coding (or at least tweaking math) and visual experimentation.
Over two decades, the community has built up various tools and resources to make this easier. Here are
some of the ways you can create or modify presets, from manual editing to automated generation:
Interactive Editors and Runtime Tools
MilkDrop’s built-in editor (Winamp): If you run MilkDrop 2 in Winamp, you can press M to bring
up an on-screen menu to edit the current preset’s values and code in real time . You can
navigate with arrow keys and edit equations, seeing the effect immediately. It’s a bit old-school (text-
mode interface) but it works. You’ll want to enable Scroll Lock to freeze preset switching while you
work (so MilkDrop doesn’t suddenly switch presets and wipe your changes) . This built-in editor is
how many authors in the 2000s made presets – by iteratively adjusting numbers, adding code, and
observing. It even has conveniences like copy-paste within the menu and hotkeys (like pressing I /
O to zoom in/out during editing) . The advantage is you get immediate feedback. The downside
is it’s within Winamp, so not a modern UI, and if Winamp isn’t playing audio you don’t see much
(though you can feed line-in or use a mic for live audio). Still, for learning, it’s worthwhile to try: load
a preset, open the editor, and tweak a simple variable (say increase rot or change a color) to see
what happens.
ProjectM Standalone & Integrations: ProjectM, the open-source MilkDrop reimplementation,
comes in various forms. There’s a standalone SDL application (for Windows/macOS/Linux) that can
capture audio and run presets . There are also plugins for players like foobar2000, VLC, etc., and
even mobile apps. While ProjectM’s current releases don’t have a polished real-time editor UI, they
do usually have a configuration file or console where you can specify a preset to load. For creation,
you might edit the .milk file in a text editor and reload it in ProjectM to see changes. The benefit
of ProjectM is you’re not tied to Winamp; you can use any audio source and platform. It’s actively
maintained – for example, version 4 improved a lot of rendering details to match MilkDrop
(instanced shapes, proper wave drawing, noise textures, etc.) – so what you see is very close
to Winamp MilkDrop. If you’re coding presets, you can keep a ProjectM window open and quickly
refresh the preset (some frontends even watch the file for changes to auto-reload, or you can hit
next/previous preset to reload it). This is a more manual workflow but effective.
MilkDrop 3 (MilkDrop2077): This is a community-driven enhanced version of MilkDrop 2 that runs
as a portable standalone app on Windows (no Winamp needed) . MilkDrop 3 (often stylized as
77 85
•
86 87
88
89
•
90
91 92
•
93
12
MilkDrop3) by project “milkdrop2077” offers the same preset compatibility and editing as MilkDrop 2,
plus lots of new features useful for creation. It has a built-in preset mixer where you can layer two
presets (the “double-preset” .milk2 format) and even automatically generate mashups by pressing F9
+ Space . For a novice user, this is fantastic because you can create something new “without
knowing any lines of code” – the program essentially picks two presets and blends their
equations for you. MilkDrop3 also added one-key color theme randomization ( C key) and a beat-
triggered auto preset changer (it can advance to the next preset on a beat drop, as an option)
. These features can inspire new presets or variations with minimal effort. It supports up to 16
custom shapes/waves for more complex visuals, and even extends the Q-range to q1–q64 for
advanced scripts . Another boon for creators: pressing N in MilkDrop3 shows debug information
– presumably values of variables, CPU/GPU usage, etc. – which can help in fine-tuning your preset
logic . MilkDrop3 is open source (on GitHub) and is actively updated with community
contributions (even some AI assistance in optimizing functions, as noted) . For Windows users,
MilkDrop3 is one of the easiest ways to play with presets today: it works with any audio (Spotify,
system sound, etc., via loopback capture) and doesn’t require the old Winamp setup .
Butterchurn (Web): Butterchurn is a WebGL/JavaScript implementation of MilkDrop that runs in a
browser . You can visit the Butterchurn Visualizer site or use Webamp (a web version of Winamp)
to see MilkDrop presets in your browser. For creation, Butterchurn isn’t an editor per se, but it’s
great for quick testing and sharing. You can drag-and-drop preset files into some Butterchurn demos
to load them. Under the hood, Butterchurn converts .milk files into a JSON format and even compiles
the equations to WebAssembly for performance , achieving surprisingly smooth results (the
team even got a ~73% performance boost by doing this compilation ). If you’re tweaking a preset,
you could use Butterchurn for instant feedback: have a local HTML page running Butterchurn, edit
your preset in a text editor, and refresh the page. Since it’s web technology, it’s very accessible.
Butterchurn is also open source on GitHub .
VJ Tools (NestDrop, etc.): There is a tool called NestDrop (a separate app that integrates MilkDrop
presets into a VJ workflow) which is popular among live visual artists. NestDrop essentially uses
MilkDrop presets (via ProjectM under the hood, I believe) to generate visuals for live music, including
in dome environments. It provides a nicer UI to trigger presets, mix them, and so forth. While
NestDrop is aimed at performance rather than editing, it’s part of the ecosystem making MilkDrop
visuals more accessible. Some VJ communities (like VJ Union) share knowledge on using MilkDrop3/
NestDrop for live shows. If one’s goal is to create visuals for a concert with minimal coding, a tool like
NestDrop might be useful (it allows selecting presets and maybe some parameter tweaking on the
fly, without delving into code).
Preset Libraries and Example Content
One of the best ways to learn or to get amazing visuals with little effort is to tap into the huge library of
community presets. Over nearly 20 years, authors have shared tens of thousands of presets. There are
packs like a 73,000+ presets megapack on the Winamp forums , and collections on websites
(Milkdrop.co.uk, DeviantArt, etc.), not to mention the presets that come bundled with ProjectM or Winamp.
By loading up a variety of presets, you can see what’s possible and even combine ideas.
94 95
95
95
96
97
98
99
93
•
100
100
101
101
102
•
103
13
Recommended libraries and resources:
Milkdrop.co.uk Guides and Packs: The site milkdrop.co.uk (no longer updated but still online in
archived form) had an extensive Beginner’s Guide to MilkDrop preset writing and community-
contributed tips. It’s worth reading for a more tutorial-style introduction (explaining oscillators,
common patterns, etc.). They also hosted preset packs and competitions.
Winamp Forums (Visualizations > MilkDrop Presets): This is where authors like Rovastar, Flexi,
Geiss, Eo.S., Martin, and many others exchanged presets. You can find themed packs (e.g., “Martins
Big Mix”, “Flexi’s Pack”) and “remixes” of presets. Remixing is common – one author might take
another’s preset and tweak it or combine with another idea, creating a new hybrid. This is totally
encouraged in the scene (with credit given in the title usually). For someone starting out, looking at
simple presets is educational. (Some famous presets are extremely complex; start with simpler ones
to see cause and effect.)
ProjectM official preset pack: ProjectM usually ships with a set of presets (often the Winamp
default set plus many community ones). It’s a grab-bag of good content. Also, on ProjectM’s GitHub
or SourceForge, they have additional preset packs (including experimental ones).
WACUP and Community Packs: WACUP (WinAmp Community Update Project) is a modern fork of
Winamp; their forums have a section for MilkDrop presets as well . Sometimes new packs or
curated “best of” collections appear there or on Reddit.
Preset Mega Pack 2017/2020: Some users have compiled all known presets into large zip files. For
example, a user “fishbrain” on Reddit compiled about 52k presets from various sources. There’s also
mention of 15k presets converted for Butterchurn JSON format on GitHub .
Using presets from others is a great shortcut to visuals. You can literally load a preset and let it run. If you
want to make it “yours,” you can then tweak a color or add a small effect. That minimal change can
sometimes produce a very different look, given how chaotic these systems are.
Automatic Generation and AI Experiments
The idea of creating MilkDrop presets automatically (by algorithmic means) is enticing, and there have been
a few projects exploring this:
MilkDrop Mashup Tools: The developer of MilkDrop3, “milkdrop2077”, also created an open-source
preset generator/masher tool . This tool can randomly pick parts of presets and combine them,
or randomly alter parameters, to produce new presets. Essentially it’s like shuffling the DNA of
existing visuals. Users have reported fun results by batch-generating presets this way and then
selecting the best ones. MilkDrop3 itself incorporates some of this (the F9 double-preset creation is
doing a form of mashup automatically) . The existence of an external tool suggests you can
script preset generation outside of MilkDrop’s UI – e.g., a program could parse .milk files, swap
sections or tweak numbers, and save new .milk files. Because presets are text, this is very doable.
Some have even used genetic algorithms (randomly mutate a preset, see if it “looks good”, iterate) –
though “looks good” is subjective, so usually a human has to pick or some proxy (like maximize
motion or contrast) is used.
Machine Learning (MilkDropML/MilkDropLM): Very recently, community members have started
training language models on the corpus of presets. One project is MilkDropLM, a 7-billion-
parameter model (and now a 32B version) fine-tuned to generate MilkDrop preset code . The
•
104
•
•
•
105 106
•
107
•
108
94 95
•
109 110
14
model was trained on over 10,000 high-quality presets and learned the “domain-specific language”
of MilkDrop scripts . The authors note that MilkDrop presets are a mix of mathematical
expressions and unique syntax, which normal code models don’t cover, so they specifically trained on
this to get a model that understands how a .milk file is structured and what formulas create
interesting effects . MilkDropLM can be prompted (via a description or just by asking for a
preset) to output a new preset. The results still require curation – not every AI-generated preset will
be amazing – but some have turned out impressively “artistic” and working. The model’s goal is to
“empower users to create visuals without having to know how to write shaders from scratch”, by letting AI
handle the tricky coding . For instance, a user might say “give me a preset with a pulsating star
field that reacts to bass” and the model might produce a plausible .milk code for that. This is a
cutting-edge approach and very cool for the MilkDrop community, which historically has hand-
written everything. It effectively can remix the learned techniques of many authors and generate
novel combinations.
Evolutionary/GA approaches: Aside from mashups and AI, the concept of using a genetic algorithm
to evolve presets was floated on forums and Hacker News. The idea is to parameterize a preset (or
multiple presets) and then randomize values, use a fitness function (which could even be user
preference: show 4 random presets and pick which one looks best, then breed from those). While I’m
not aware of a polished end-user tool that does this, it’s conceptually possible. One challenge is that
“fitness” is hard to quantify algorithmically (what makes a visual good?); hence why interactive
evolution with a human in the loop was considered. In any case, this approach is similar to how
some visual artists evolve fractals or graphics by mutation – it could be done with MilkDrop if
someone hooks into the parameters.
Image-based or procedural generation: Some have tried using external data (like images or 3D
models) to drive presets. MilkDrop itself doesn’t support arbitrary image import (except as static
textures in shaders, or via the “sprite” feature in some versions for small bitmaps). But one example:
there’s a pack called “MilkDrop Image-Based Presets” (from 2022) which presumably used some
technique to incorporate images into presets (perhaps by encoding them in equations or using the
texture feature cleverly) . This is more of a hack/trick than a standard approach.
In summary, you have a spectrum from fully manual editing to fully automated generation:
If you want minimal effort: use MilkDrop3’s mashup generator (literally F9 + Space to get a random
new visual) , or grab a random preset from a pack.
If you want some creative control but not heavy coding: tweak existing presets (change colors,
toggle waves/shapes, adjust a sine frequency or amplitude). Even a small tweak can produce a visibly
distinct result, and this way you don’t start from a blank slate.
For learning and coding from scratch: use the guides and an interactive environment (Winamp or
MilkDrop3). Start with simple goals like “make a circle that grows with the beat” – try coding that in a
preset, etc. The learning curve is not too bad if you have math familiarity, and it’s rewarding to see
math formulas dance on music.
Leverage the community: Don’t reinvent the wheel – many effects (e.g., oscillating zoom, strobe on
beat, spiral distortion) have known formula patterns in presets. You can borrow code snippets or
whole sections from one preset to another. The result is often interesting – in fact many “remix”
presets are exactly that: taking the per-pixel from one and the per-frame from another, for instance.
109
110 111
110
•
•
112
•
95
•
•
•
15
Starting Out: Recommended Utilities & Libraries
To get up and running quickly with making your own visualizations, here’s a short list of open-source tools
and resources:
ProjectM (libprojectM) and Example Apps – Library & Apps. If you’re a developer or just want a
standalone visualizer, ProjectM is a solid choice. It’s LGPL and runs on many platforms . You can
use the SDL standalone app to visualize any audio. It comes with a trove of presets to play with.
While it lacks a built-in editor GUI, you can manually edit presets and drop them in the presets folder
to test. This is great for integrating MilkDrop into your own software or using it in situations where
Winamp isn’t an option.
MilkDrop3 (Standalone Windows app) – Tool. For Windows users, MilkDrop3 is highly
recommended for creation. It’s basically MilkDrop on steroids: backward compatible with all
MilkDrop/ProjectM presets, and adds easier mixing, randomization, and debug tools .
Because it can capture audio from anywhere, you can use it with modern streaming or DJ software.
Butterchurn (Web library) – Web Tool. If you have basic web dev skills or just want a quick way to
test presets, Butterchurn is excellent. It’s open source (MIT license) and even available via NPM for
embedding in web projects . You can load thousands of presets converted to JSON (there’s a
repository with 15k presets in Butterchurn format ). For sharing your creations, Butterchurn is a
convenient way (since anyone with a browser can see them, no install needed).
Preset Packs (Community libraries) – Content. Grab a curated preset pack such as “Cream of the
Crop” or others mentioned on forums . These packs often highlight the best presets. Studying
them or using them as a base will save you time. For instance, if you like how a preset reacts to bass,
you can open it and see that the author perhaps used zoom = 1 + 0.15*bass in per-frame or
something – then you can adapt that technique.
MilkDrop Preset Authoring Guide (Ryan’s and the community one) – Documentation. The official
guide on Geisswerks (by Ryan Geiss) is a technical reference – very useful once you know basics, for
looking up specific variables or functions . The community “Beginner’s Guide” (available via
archive) is more tutorial-like. Having these on hand will answer a lot of “can I do X?” questions. For
example, you might wonder “what does meshx variable do?” (It gives the mesh resolution user
setting) – the docs have these details.
Milkdrop2077 Preset Generator – Automation. This is on GitHub and can automatically generate
presets or mashups . If you want to produce a bunch of random visuals to pick from, this could
be fun. It’s written in Pascal, but as an end-user you’d use the compiled tool – it might present a GUI
or just spit out .milk files. (It’s a niche tool for experimenters, but worth mentioning for “minimal
user input” scenario.)
MilkDropLM AI Model – Experimental AI. For the adventurous, the MilkDropLM model on
HuggingFace can be tried in a Google Colab or using text-gen UI . You could input a prompt
or just let it generate. It will output a preset in text form (often in a Markdown code block). You then
copy that into a .milk file and test it. This requires some setup (and a decent GPU for the 7B or 32B
model), so it’s not the simplest path for everyone, but it’s a cutting-edge way to get new presets. The
model’s creators have shared example outputs, and while not every AI preset is great, some are
remarkably complex – showing that the model captured a lot of the “style” of presets .
•
113
•
114 95
•
115
107
•
116
•
117
118
•
108
•
119 120
110
16
Finally, one more tip: when editing or generating presets, keep music running! The visuals make the
most sense and are easiest to tune when reacting to actual audio. If you’re editing without music, you might
misjudge speeds or intensities. A trick some use is to have a short loop or track that they know well and
design the preset to that, ensuring beats and drops cause the desired effect. Then test on various genres
(since a preset reacting well to, say, trance might look dull on classical music – some presets even include
logic to detect beat patterns).
Conclusion: MilkDrop presets are a unique fusion of art and code – little reactive programs that create
psychedelic imagery from sound. The .milk file format encodes this via sections for per-frame logic, per-
pixel warping, custom shapes, and waves . The engine executes these in a tight frame-by-frame loop,
feeding in music frequencies and time, and outputting continuously evolving graphics . Variables and
math expressions flow through the pipeline, with special care for variable scoping and persistence to allow
complex behavior across frames . MilkDrop 2 and 3 expanded the possibilities further with GPU
shaders , higher object counts, and quality-of-life features, all while staying backward-compatible. Today,
whether you use Winamp’s classic plugin, ProjectM on your platform of choice, or MilkDrop3’s modern
enhancements, you have access to a vast community-created visual library and tools that can help you
create your own audio-reactive visuals. With even AI entering the scene to suggest preset designs, the
MilkDrop ecosystem remains vibrant and continues to evolve – much like the visuals it produces, it’s an
ever-changing, collaborative work of art and engineering. Enjoy experimenting, and soon you’ll have your
music “dancing” on screen with your very own preset!
Sources:
MilkDrop Wiki/Encyclopedia: Preset composition and code types
MilkDrop Authoring Guide (Geisswerks): technical reference on per-frame, per-vertex, shapes, waves,
variables, and shaders
An Introduction to projectM (LWN.net, 2018): explanation of MilkDrop’s equation system and
ProjectM’s implementation
MilkDrop3 (community project) documentation: features like double-presets, increased limits, ease-
of-use additions
MilkDrop3 VJ Union post: list of new capabilities (shapes/waves count, q1-64, debug mode, beat-
trigger, etc.)
ProjectM release notes: improvements to matching MilkDrop behavior (wave rendering, instanced
shapes, shader translation)
MilkDropLM (HuggingFace model card): description of AI model for generating presets
MilkDrop forums and community posts: discussions of preset creation and tool links (e.g., mashup
tutorials).
MilkDrop
https://en-academic.com/dic.nsf/enwiki/1065954
MilkDrop3 - VJ UNION
https://vjun.io/vdmo/milkdrop3-4hon
1
121
68 66
76
• 1 3 53
•
18 19 38 68
•
121
•
114 95
•
4 122
•
92 81
• 109 110
•
1 2 3 15 53 76 104 113
4 57 82 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 114 122
17
www.geisswerks.com
https://www.geisswerks.com/milkdrop/milkdrop_preset_authoring.html
An introduction to projectM [LWN.net]
https://lwn.net/Articles/750152/
Releases · projectM-visualizer/projectm · GitHub
https://github.com/projectM-visualizer/projectm/releases
Butterchurn Visualizer
https://butterchurnviz.com/
Butterchurn – A WebGL Implementation of the Milkdrop Visualizer
https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=26813265
Butterchurn is a WebGL implementation of the Milkdrop Visualizer
https://github.com/jberg/butterchurn
73k+ Presets Megapack! - Winamp & Shoutcast Forums
https://forums.winamp.com/forum/visualizations/milkdrop/milkdrop-presets/4625022-73k-presets-megapack
r/milkdrop - Reddit
https://www.reddit.com/r/milkdrop/
My MilkDrop Presets Collection - WACUP
https://getwacup.com/community/index.php?topic=2080.0
ansorre/tens-of-thousands-milkdrop-presets-for-butterchurn - GitHub
https://github.com/ansorre/tens-of-thousands-milkdrop-presets-for-butterchurn
GitHub - milkdrop2077/milkdrop2077: MilkDrop2077 is a free and open-source presets generator /
masher and randomizer for MilkDrop / projectM / BeatDrop Music Visualizer.
https://github.com/milkdrop2077/milkdrop2077
InferenceIllusionist/MilkDropLM-7b-v0.3 · Hugging Face
https://huggingface.co/InferenceIllusionist/MilkDropLM-7b-v0.3
MilkDrop Image-Based Presets Collection DEMO2 (2022) - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-40_a-E3gRg
NestDrop: Presets Collection – Cream of the Crop | The Fulldome Blog
https://thefulldomeblog.wordpress.com/2020/02/21/nestdrop-presets-collection-cream-of-the-crop/
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35
36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 54 55 56 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68
69 70 71 72 73 74 75 77 78 85 86 87 88 89 117 118
58 79 90 121
80 81 83 84 91 92
100
101
102 115
103
105
106
107
108
109 110 111 119 120
112
116
18